README.md, before:

# completable-futures
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/spotify/completable-futures/master.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/spotify/completable-futures)
[![Test Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/spotify/completable-futures/master.svg)](https://codecov.io/github/spotify/completable-futures?branch=master)
[![Maven Central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/com.spotify/completable-futures.svg)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.spotify/completable-futures)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/spotify/completable-futures.svg)](LICENSE)

completable-futures is a set of utility functions to simplify working with asynchronous code in
Java8.

## Usage

Using `completable-futures` requires Java 8 but has no additional dependencies. It is meant to be
included as a library in other software. To import it with maven, add this to your pom:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.spotify</groupId>
    <artifactId>completable-futures</artifactId>
    <version>0.3.1</version>
</dependency>
```

## Features

### Combining more than two things

The builtin CompletableFuture API includes `future.thenCombine(otherFuture, function)` but if you
want to combine more than two things it gets trickier. The `CompletableFutures` class contains the
following APIs to simplify this use-case:

#### allAsList

If you want to join a list of futures of uniform type, use `allAsList`. This returns a future which
completes to a list of all values of its inputs:

```java
List<CompletableFuture<String>> futures = asList(completedFuture("a"), completedFuture("b"));
CompletableFuture<List<String>> joined = CompletableFutures.allAsList(futures);
```

#### successfulAsList

Works like `allAsList`, but futures that fail will not fail the joined future. Instead, the
defaultValueMapper function will be called once for each failed future and value returned will be
put in the resulting list on the place corresponding to the failed future. The default value
returned by the function may be anything, such as `null` or `Optional.empty()`.

```java
List<CompletableFuture<String>> input = asList(
    completedFuture("a"),
    exceptionallyCompletedFuture(new RuntimeException("boom")));
CompletableFuture<List<String>> joined = CompletableFutures.successfulAsList(input, t -> "default");
```

#### joinList

`joinList` is a stream collector that combines multiple futures into a list. This is handy if you
apply an asynchronous operation to a collection of entities:

```java
collection.stream()
    .map(this::someAsyncFunction)
    .collect(CompletableFutures.joinList())
    .thenApply(this::consumeList)
```

#### combine

If you want to combine more than two futures of different types, use the `combine` method:

```java
CompletableFutures.combine(f1, f2, (a, b) -> a + b);
CompletableFutures.combine(f1, f2, f3, (a, b, c) -> a + b + c);
CompletableFutures.combine(f1, f2, f3, f4, (a, b, c, d) -> a + b + c + d);
CompletableFutures.combine(f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, (a, b, c, d, e) -> a + b + c + d + e);
```

#### combineFutures

If you want to combine multiple futures into another future, use `combineFutures`:

```java
CompletableFutures.combineFutures(f1, f2, (a, b) -> completedFuture(a + b));
CompletableFutures.combineFutures(f1, f2, f3, (a, b, c) -> completedFuture(a + b + c));
CompletableFutures.combineFutures(f1, f2, f3, f4, (a, b, c, d) -> completedFuture(a + b + c + d));
CompletableFutures.combineFutures(f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, (a, b, c, d, e) -> completedFuture(a + b + c + d + e));
```

### Scheduling

#### Polling an external resource

If you are dealing with a long-running external task that only exposes a polling API, you can
transform that into a future like so:

```java
Supplier<Optional<T>> pollingTask = () -> Optional.ofNullable(resource.result());
Duration frequency = Duration.ofSeconds(2);
CompletableFuture<T> result = CompletableFutures.poll(pollingTask, frequency, executor);
```

### Missing parts of the CompletableFuture API

The `CompletableFutures` class includes utility functions for operating on futures that is missing
from the builtin API.

#### handleCompose

Like `CompletableFuture.handle` but lets you return a new `CompletionStage` instead of a
direct value.

```java
CompletionStage<String> composed = handleCompose(future, (value, throwable) -> completedFuture("hello"));
```

#### exceptionallyCompose

Like `CompletableFuture.exceptionally` but lets you return a new `CompletionStage` instead of a
direct value.

```java
CompletionStage<String> composed = CompletableFutures.exceptionallyCompose(future, throwable -> completedFuture("fallback"));
```

#### dereference

Unwrap a `CompletionStage<CompletionStage<T>>` to a plain `CompletionStage<T>`.

```java
CompletionStage<CompletionStage<String>> wrapped = completedFuture(completedFuture("hello"));
CompletionStage<String> unwrapped = CompletableFutures.dereference(wrapped);
```

#### exceptionallyCompletedFuture

Creates a new future that is already exceptionally completed with the given exception.

```java
return CompletableFutures.exceptionallyCompletedFuture(new RuntimeException("boom"));
```

## License

Copyright 2016 Spotify AB.
Licensed under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](LICENSE).

## Code of Conduct

This project adheres to the [Open Code of Conduct][code-of-conduct]. By participating, you are
expected to honor this code.

[code-of-conduct]: https://github.com/spotify/code-of-conduct/blob/master/code-of-conduct.md

Commit message:

Implement combine with arbitrary number of stages

README.md, after:

# completable-futures
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/travis/spotify/completable-futures/master.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/spotify/completable-futures)
[![Test Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/spotify/completable-futures/master.svg)](https://codecov.io/github/spotify/completable-futures?branch=master)
[![Maven Central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/com.spotify/completable-futures.svg)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.spotify/completable-futures)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/spotify/completable-futures.svg)](LICENSE)

completable-futures is a set of utility functions to simplify working with asynchronous code in
Java8.

## Usage

Using `completable-futures` requires Java 8 but has no additional dependencies. It is meant to be
included as a library in other software. To import it with maven, add this to your pom:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.spotify</groupId>
    <artifactId>completable-futures</artifactId>
    <version>0.3.1</version>
</dependency>
```

## Features

### Combining more than two things

The builtin CompletableFuture API includes `future.thenCombine(otherFuture, function)` but if you
want to combine more than two things it gets trickier. The `CompletableFutures` class contains the
following APIs to simplify this use-case:

#### allAsList

If you want to join a list of futures of uniform type, use `allAsList`. This returns a future which
completes to a list of all values of its inputs:

```java
List<CompletableFuture<String>> futures = asList(completedFuture("a"), completedFuture("b"));
CompletableFuture<List<String>> joined = CompletableFutures.allAsList(futures);
```

#### successfulAsList

Works like `allAsList`, but futures that fail will not fail the joined future. Instead, the
defaultValueMapper function will be called once for each failed future and value returned will be
put in the resulting list on the place corresponding to the failed future. The default value
returned by the function may be anything, such as `null` or `Optional.empty()`.

```java
List<CompletableFuture<String>> input = asList(
    completedFuture("a"),
    exceptionallyCompletedFuture(new RuntimeException("boom")));
CompletableFuture<List<String>> joined = CompletableFutures.successfulAsList(input, t -> "default");
```

#### joinList

`joinList` is a stream collector that combines multiple futures into a list. This is handy if you
apply an asynchronous operation to a collection of entities:

```java
collection.stream()
    .map(this::someAsyncFunction)
    .collect(CompletableFutures.joinList())
    .thenApply(this::consumeList)
```

#### combine

If you want to combine more than two futures of different types, use the `combine` method:

```java
CompletableFutures.combine(f1, f2, (a, b) -> a + b);
CompletableFutures.combine(f1, f2, f3, (a, b, c) -> a + b + c);
CompletableFutures.combine(f1, f2, f3, f4, (a, b, c, d) -> a + b + c + d);
CompletableFutures.combine(f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, (a, b, c, d, e) -> a + b + c + d + e);
```

#### combineFutures

If you want to combine multiple futures into another future, use `combineFutures`:

```java
CompletableFutures.combineFutures(f1, f2, (a, b) -> completedFuture(a + b));
CompletableFutures.combineFutures(f1, f2, f3, (a, b, c) -> completedFuture(a + b + c));
CompletableFutures.combineFutures(f1, f2, f3, f4, (a, b, c, d) -> completedFuture(a + b + c + d));
CompletableFutures.combineFutures(f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, (a, b, c, d, e) -> completedFuture(a + b + c + d + e));
```

#### Combine an arbitrary number of futures

If you want to combine more than six futures of different types, use the other `combine` method.
Since it supports vararg usage, the function is now the first argument.
The `Combiner` object that is input to the function can be used to extract values from the input functions.

This is effectively the same thing as calling `join()` on the input future, but it's safer because
calling `.get(f)` on a future that is not part of the combine, you will get an `IllegalArgumentException`.

This prevents accidental misuse where you would join on a future that is either not complete, or might never complete
at all.

```java
CompletionStage<String> f1;
CompletionStage<String> f2;
CompletionStage<String> result = combine(combined -> combined.get(f1) + combined.get(f2), f1, f2);
```

This variant also exists in the `combineFutures` form.
 
### Scheduling

#### Polling an external resource

If you are dealing with a long-running external task that only exposes a polling API, you can
transform that into a future like so:

```java
Supplier<Optional<T>> pollingTask = () -> Optional.ofNullable(resource.result());
Duration frequency = Duration.ofSeconds(2);
CompletableFuture<T> result = CompletableFutures.poll(pollingTask, frequency, executor);
```

### Missing parts of the CompletableFuture API

The `CompletableFutures` class includes utility functions for operating on futures that is missing
from the builtin API.

#### handleCompose

Like `CompletableFuture.handle` but lets you return a new `CompletionStage` instead of a
direct value.

```java
CompletionStage<String> composed = handleCompose(future, (value, throwable) -> completedFuture("hello"));
```

#### exceptionallyCompose

Like `CompletableFuture.exceptionally` but lets you return a new `CompletionStage` instead of a
direct value.

```java
CompletionStage<String> composed = CompletableFutures.exceptionallyCompose(future, throwable -> completedFuture("fallback"));
```

#### dereference

Unwrap a `CompletionStage<CompletionStage<T>>` to a plain `CompletionStage<T>`.

```java
CompletionStage<CompletionStage<String>> wrapped = completedFuture(completedFuture("hello"));
CompletionStage<String> unwrapped = CompletableFutures.dereference(wrapped);
```

#### exceptionallyCompletedFuture

Creates a new future that is already exceptionally completed with the given exception.

```java
return CompletableFutures.exceptionallyCompletedFuture(new RuntimeException("boom"));
```

## License

Copyright 2016 Spotify AB.
Licensed under the [Apache License, Version 2.0](LICENSE).

## Code of Conduct

This project adheres to the [Open Code of Conduct][code-of-conduct]. By participating, you are
expected to honor this code.

[code-of-conduct]: https://github.com/spotify/code-of-conduct/blob/master/code-of-conduct.md
